---
title: "New Leaning Language"
date: 2023-01-25
---

What is Swift?

As the title says new learning language I would choose " swift ". Swift is a powerful programming language that includes a maximum of other programming languages such as c++, java, etc. Swift is an open-source programming language and easy to learn, designed by apple.

It is mainly used for ios and macOS development. These days swift is evolving and also has the fastest-growing community.


why swift?

- To explore a new career path
- To make progress and improve me
- Swift has simple and easy syntax to learn and write
- The speed of the code is faster compared to languages 
- Demand is increasing for swift developers 

Concepts in swift 

Variables in swift:

Variables in swift help to keep track of the data we provided

    var firstName = "Priya"
    print(firstName)

Here, We declare a new variable called "firstName" the var that keeps track of the "firstName". An equal sign indicates the assigned text data to the Name variable.

If you want to use the data we can just refer to the variable "firstName"

    firstName = "Rudroju"
    print(firstName)

We can reuse the variable only if it has the same data type.

So, in the above example, the variable keeps track of the latest declared data of the same data type.

When you try to re-assign the data in the integer data type or any other data type it shows you an error. There are other ways to keep track of the data if it has a different data type and can use the same variable. These are called  " constants ".

Declaring a constant instead of using the 'var' keyword we can use the 'let' keyword.

    let firstName = "vishwak"

The difference between constant and variable is you can use constant once you declare and later you can reassign different data or input but variable can't 
be used.

If you want to declare explicitly a variable that only holds the string data we use:

    var firstName:String = "Priya"


Data Types: 
 
    var Str:String = "Priya"       //To store piece of text 

    var anInt:Int = 10            //Whole numbers positive and negative

    var aFloat:Float = 0.2        //Decimal numbers

    var aDouble: Double = 0.3     //Large decimal numbers

    var aBool = true              //True or False


1) Swift if, if..else statements

The syntax of the if statement in swift is:

    if condition {
 
             //body
         }
 
If the condition is evaluated as true the inside code will be executed. 

If the condition is evaluated as false the inside code will be skipped.

For example, 
                                                         
    let a = 10                                                 
    if a <= 10 {                                                
    print("a is less than 10")                                 
    }                                                           
     
                          
                                                            The condition is true                                       
                                                            let a = 35
                                                            if a <= 20 {
                                                            print("a is less than 10")
                                                            }


                                       // The condition is false. So, in this case, we use the else if statement

                                                            
                                                            else if a < 25 {
                                                            print("a is less than 15")
                                                            }
                                                            else {
                                                            print("valid") }

                                              
The last feature of if statements which is the else clause, is used when none of the statements of the branches are true and if it evaluated as true in the else branch it will be executed inside the else branch.

If you do two variables and want to chain the conditions together and wanted to be true we use operators:
For example: 

    if a <= 35 && b > 10  //b is true ,a is not true


you want one of both to be true we use or operator:

    if a <= 35 || b > 10 
    
    
Switch statements:

Syntax: 

    switch value to consider {       //The switch statement starts with the keyword "switch" followed by the value being evaluated

    case value1:                  // Inside braces you put all the things/values you wanted to check within the braces, 
                                     multiple cases are specified using the "case" keyword, each with its corresponding code to be 
                                     executed if the value matches
               statement
    case value2:                 
               statement

    default:                     // If none of the cases match, the code under the "default" case will be executed.
               statement
    }


For example:

    let chr = "a"                      

    switch chr {                        //This code uses a switch statement to determine what to print based on the variable "chr" value.

       case "a":                    //If "chr" is equal to "a", it will print "this is a".
             print("this is a")
       default:
             print("none")
    }

Output: 

    this is a                    

By combining multiple cases, the same block of code can be executed for multiple values.

For example,

    let chr = "b"

    switch chr {
       case "a": 
       print("this is a")
       
       case "b", "c":                          //If "chr" is equal to "b" or "c", it will print "this is a b or c". 
       print("this is a b or c")
  
       default:                                  //If none of the cases match, it will print "none"
       print("none")
    }

Output:

    this is a b or c
    
 
For In Loop:

There are 2 keywords to use "For" and "In"

Syntax:

    for counter in lower...upper{                 //counter is a variable name, lower and upper is an inclusive range that we provide
     Code
    }


Here is an example,

    for counter in 1...5 {                        //variable name is counter, specify the lower and upper range followed by a counter variable
    print("hi")
    } 

Output:

    hi
    hi
    hi
    hi
    hi

In a for-in loop, the variable "counter" is used to refer to each iteration and contains the current number. For example, in the first iteration "counter" contains 1, in the second iteration it contains 2, and so on. To display the value of "counter", you can use the print statement, such as "print(counter)".

For example:
Display the sum of all numbers

    var sum = 0
    for counter in 1...5 {

    sum += counter

    }

    print(sum)


Output:

    15

This code uses a for loop to add up the numbers from 1 to 5 and store the result in the variable "sum". In each iteration, the current value of "counter" is added to "sum". After 5 iterations, the final value of "sum" is displayed as the output, which is 15. The sum is continuously updated in each iteration until the loop ends.

There are two types of loops these are used when the number of times that you need to loop for is unknown

1) While loop:

The while loop checks a condition before executing the code within its braces. If the condition is true, the code will run, and the condition will be checked again. 
If the condition is false, the code will not run. 

Syntax: 

    while condition{
      
      code

    }

It is similar to the switch case, it checks the condition if it is not true then the code not going tp be run at all

Let's see:

    var counter = 5
    while counter > 0{

    print("hi")
    counter -= 1       // without this condition it runs for infinite times, if you write this condition it makes counter > 0 false

    }

Output:
 
    hi 
    hi
    hi
    hi
    hi

In the example , the loop prints "hi" 5 times, and the variable "counter" is decremented each time until the condition "counter > 0" is false.

2) Repeat-while:

Syntax: 

    repeat{
      code
    }while condition

The repeat-while loop is similar to the while loop, but the condition is checked after the code runs at least once. 
In this loop, the code within the braces will run first, and then the condition will be evaluated. If the condition is true, the loop will repeat. 

    var counter2 = 5

    repeat {
         print("hello")
         counter2 -= 1
    }
     while counter2 > 0

Output: 

    hi 
    hi
    hi
    hi
    hi
    hello
    hello
    hello
    hello
    hello

In the example, the loop prints "hello" 5 times, and the variable "counter2" is decremented until the condition "counter2 > 0" is false.

Challenges:

I encountered a difficulty when I was writing a program that utilized a repeat-while loop. It was a new idea for me and I was also not familiar with the implementation of repeat-while loops in Swift. To overcome this challenge, I increased my practice and looked at more examples, as well as referred to the resources listed in "reference".

Functions:

Organizing code into manageable units, referred to as functions, is a common practice. 
By giving the block of code a function name, you can execute it simply by calling that name whenever necessary. 
This helps to keep the code organized and focused on specific tasks.

Syntax:

    func name() {         //By giving the function a descriptive name, you can easily call it and execute the code contained within by simply calling "name()". 
     code
    }


For example, Add two numbers

    func sumTwoNumbers(){
     let a = 1
     let b = 2
     let c = a + b
    print(c)
    }
    sumTwoNumbers()

Output:

    3    

To make a variable accessible outside of a function, it must be declared outside of the function's scope.

Challenging part in functions: 

One of the limitations of functions is the inability to access variables and constants declared within the function from outside the function.
Functions are typically used to accept inputs, perform specific tasks, and then return the result when they are called. This is achieved by using the 'return value' statement.

Syntax: Return value

    func name() -> DataType {

        code
     return value                //return is used to end the function and send back the data
    }

Example, 

    func sumTwoNumbers() -> Int {

     let a = 1
     let b = 2
     let c = a + b 

    return c
    }

    let sum = sumTwoNumbers()               //constant are used to keep track of data so we use the "let" keyword
    print(sum)

Output:

    3

To be more specific about which two numbers should be added, we use input parameters

Syntax: 1 parameter

    func name(argumentLabel parameterName:DataType){     
     
     code
    } 

The argumentLabel makes the function call easier to read in a natural language format, while the parameterName is used within the function if you need to access the data.

Example for passing one parameter,

    func sumTwoNumbers(arg para:Int) -> Int{

     let a = para
     let b = 2
     let c = a + b 

    return c 
    }

    let sum = sumTwoNumber(arg:5)     //passing 5 into the function 
    print(sum)

This function named sumTwoNumbers takes in an Int value as an argument, referred to as argumentParameter, adds it to a predefined value of 2, and returns the sum as an Int. The let statement is then used to call the function with an argument of 5, and the result is stored in the result constant. The result is then printed using the print statement.


If you want to pass multiple parameters you just have to use a comma(,) in between each parameter.

Syntax: Multiple parameters

    func name(arg1 para1:DataType1, arg2 para2:DataType2){

          code
    }

For example, 

    func sumTwoNumbers(arg para:Int, arg2 para2:Int) -> Int {

     let a = para
     let b = para2 
     let c = a + b 
    return c
    }
    let sum = sumTwoNumbers(para:5,para2:5)
    print(sum)


Output:

    10

This function sumTwoNumbers takes in two Int values as arguments, para, and para2, adds them together, and returns the sum as an Int. The function is then called with 5 as the value for both para and para2, and the result is stored in the constant result. The value of the result is then printed, yielding an output of 10.

If you wish to exclude the parameter name and label when calling a function, and instead only provide numbers, you can put an underscore _ in front of the parameter name (_para: Int, _para2: Int). Then, when calling the function, you would simply provide the numbers, as in let sum = sumTwoNumbers(5, 5).




















   

How did I learn? 

    https://www.educative.io/blog/swift-programming

    https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/TheBasics.html


